Agency is a core concept in studies that seek to explore how cultures and societies are made, and how they might be made fairer and more equal. Agency is frequently opposed to 'structures' in debates about which has primacy. Structuralist theorists argue that structures not only determine, but serve to restrict and oppress already-disadvantaged groups in society. Marx's assertion that people are able to make history, or act with agency, but that they do so in conditions not of their own making (1852), guides contemporary Marxist critics of capitalist structures which incorporate processes of data mining and profiling (for example Fuchs, 2011, 2014; Hearn, 2010, 2013). Some of the authors discussed above arguably fall into this category. In contrast, others have stressed the capacity of individual human agents to make and shape their worlds. Still others have highlighted the dialectic relationship between structure and agency: structures shape and constrain human agency, but human agents act against, as well as within, them (Giddens, 1984).

Toynbee offers a useful summary of the ways in which critical realism understands interrelationships between structure and agency, drawing on the work of Roy Bhaskar (1979). Within this framework, people are not seen only as components or effects of structure(s). Rather, they reproduce and occasionally transform society; they do not simply create it, as social structure is always already made. Bhaskar develops 'the transformational model of social activity', or TMSA, as a way of making sense of the relationship between people and society. Toynbee sums this up as follows:

Society consists in relations between people, and as such is dependent on their activities which reproduce or (less often) transform society. From the other side, human practice depends on society; there can be no meaningful action without social structure. Crucially, this dependency on structure imposes limits on what people can do while never fully determining actions. In other words we have some autonomy as agents. (Toynbee, 2007)

Social theorist Derek Layder (2006) argues that rather than seeing dualisms (structure/agency, society/individual) as separate, opposing and locked in a struggle with each other for dominance, entities in dualisms should be thought of as 'different aspects of social life which are inextricably interrelated' (p. 3), and so interdependent and mutually influential. Following Giddens, he understands agency as 'the ability of human beings to make a difference in the world' (2006: 4). The word agency, he writes, 'points to the idea that people are "agents" in the social world – they are able to do things which affect the social relationships in which they are embedded. People are not simply passive victims of social pressure and circumstances'. The action-structure dualism draws attention to the 'mutual influence of social activity and the social contexts in which it takes place' and the ways in which social structures, institutions and cultural resources mould and form social activity.

The questions at the heart of this special issue reflect these tensions between structure and agency, control and resistance. The five contributions aim to consider the extent of the dominance of the structures of datafication, the possibility of agency, and the spaces in between. At the same time, the contributions seek to combine critical perspectives on datafication with the perspectives of actors within data mining practices. The aim is to enrich our understanding of data and datafication, by bringing together structural analyses with recognition of individual agency in the context of these structures.

But what kinds of agency are implied within this framing? For some writers, agency is necessarily a reflexive practice. Couldry, for example, defines agency as 'the longer processes of action based on reflection, giving an account of what one has done, even more basically, making sense of the world so as to act within it' (Couldry, 2014: 891). Layder makes a similar argument when he writes:

Social analysis must take into account the meaning that the social world has for the individual based on how the person understands and responds to their lived experience. The way people construe their social existence helps them formulate their plans and intentions. They make choices about the direction in which their lives should go on the basis of their experience. As such, persons are 'intentional', self-reflective and capable of making some difference in the world.

For other writers (such as Bourdieu, 1980), agency is much less reflexive. It is exercised habitually, without thinking. In this framing, acting with agency is not necessarily reflexive or moral; it is not necessarily good. This is also true of those conceptions of data power which locate agency in hardware and software channelling data streams, as well as in platforms and business models (not only Lash, 2007, but also Fuchs, 2014; Gillespie, 2014).
